README.md, before:

# Search Query Syntax Parser

> A simple parser for advanced search query syntax.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/nepsilon/search-query-parser.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/nepsilon/search-query-parser)

It parses a string like this:
```
from:hi@retrace.io,foo@gmail.com to:me subject:vacations date:1/10/2013-15/04/2014 photos
```

And turns it into an object like this:

```javascript
{
  from: ['hi@retrace.io', 'foo@gmail.com'],
  to: 'me',
  subject: 'vacations',
  date: {
    from: '1/10/2013',
    to: '15/04/2014'
    },
  text: 'photos',
  offsets: 
   [ { keyword: 'from', value: 'hi@retrace.io,foo@gmail.com', offsetStart: 0, offsetEnd: 32 },
     { keyword: 'to', value: 'me', offsetStart: 33, offsetEnd: 38 },
     { keyword: 'subject', value: 'vacations', offsetStart: 39, offsetEnd: 56 },
     { keyword: 'date', value: '1/10/2013-15/04/2014', offsetStart: 57, offsetEnd: 82 },
     { text: 'photos', offsetStart: 83, offsetEnd: 89 } ]
}
```

## Installation

```shell
$ npm install search-query-parser
```

## Usage

```javascript
var searchQuery = require('search-query-parser');

var query = 'from:hi@retrace.io,foo@gmail.com to:me subject:vacations date:1/10/2013-15/04/2014 photos';
var options = {keywords: ['from', 'to', 'subject'], ranges: ['date']}

var searchQueryObj = searchQuery.parse(query, options);

// searchQueryObj.from is now ['hi@retrace.io', 'foo@gmail.com']
// searchQueryObj.to is now 'me'
// searchQueryObj.date is now {from: '1/10/2013', to: '15/04/2014'}
// searchQueryObj.text is now 'photos'
```

You can configure what keywords and ranges the parser should accept with the options argument.
It accepts 5 values:
* `keywords`, that can be separated by commas (,). Accepts an array of strings.
* `ranges`, that can be separated by a hyphen (-). Accepts an array of strings.
* `tokenize`, that controls the behaviour of text search terms. If set to `true`, non-keyword text terms are returned as an array of strings where each term in the array is a whitespace-separated word, or a multi-word term surrounded by single- or double-quotes.
* `alwaysArray`, a boolean that controls the behaviour of the returned query. If set to `true`, all matched keywords would always be arrays instead of strings. If set to `false` they will be strings if matched a single value. Defaults to `false`.
* `offsets`, a boolean that controls the behaviour of the returned query. If set to `true`, the query will contain the offsets object. If set to `false`, the query will not contain the offsets object. Defaults to `true`.

If no keywords or ranges are specified, or if none are present in the given search query, then `searchQuery.parse` will return a string if `tokenize` is false, or an array of strings under the key `text` if `tokenize` is true.

```javascript
var searchQuery = require('search-query-parser');

var query = 'a query with "just text"';
var parsedQuery = searchQuery.parse(query);
// parsedQuery is now 'a query with "just text"'

var options = {keywords: ['unused']};
var parsedQueryWithOptions = searchQuery.parse(query, options);
// parsedQueryWithOptions is now 'a query with "just text"'

var options2 = {tokenize: true};
var parsedQueryWithTokens = searchQuery.parse(query, options2);
// parsedQueryWithTokens is now: ['a', 'query', 'with', 'just text']
```

You can also use exclusion syntax, like `-from:sep@foobar.io name:hello,world`. This also works with non-keyword text terms when `tokenize` is set to `true`. 

```javascript
{
  name: ['hello', 'world'],
  exclude: {
    from: ['sep@foobar.io']
  }
}
```

Sometimes checking against whether a keyword holds string or not can be excessive and prone to errors; it's often easier to simply expect everything is an array even if it means doing 1-iteration loops often.

```javascript
var searchQuery = require('search-query-parser');

var query = 'test:helloworld fun:yay,happy';
var options = {keywords: ['test', 'fun']};
var parsedQueryWithOptions = searchQuery.parse(query, options);
// parsedQueryWithOptions is now:
// {
//   test: 'helloworld',
//   fun: ['yay', 'happy']
// }

var optionsAlwaysArray = {keywords: ['test', 'fun'], alwaysArray: true};
var parsedQueryWithOptions = searchQuery.parse(query, options);
// parsedQueryWithOptions is now:
// {
//   test: ['helloworld'], //No need to check whether test is a string or not!
//   fun: ['yay', 'happy']
// }
```

The offsets object could become pretty huge with long search queries which could be an unnecessary use of space if no functionality depends on it. It can simply be turned off using the option `offsets: false`

## Testing

The 29 tests are written using the BDD testing framework should.js, and run with mocha.

Run `npm install should` and `npm install -g mocha` to install them both.

Run tests with `make test`.

## License

The MIT License (MIT)

Copyright (c) 2014 retraceio

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Updated README, fleshed out types doc a bit more

README.md, after:

# Search Query Syntax Parser

> A simple parser for advanced search query syntax.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/nepsilon/search-query-parser.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/nepsilon/search-query-parser)

It parses a string like this:
```
from:hi@retrace.io,foo@gmail.com to:me subject:vacations date:1/10/2013-15/04/2014 photos
```

And turns it into an object like this:

```javascript
{
  from: ['hi@retrace.io', 'foo@gmail.com'],
  to: 'me',
  subject: 'vacations',
  date: {
    from: '1/10/2013',
    to: '15/04/2014'
    },
  text: 'photos',
  offsets: 
   [ { keyword: 'from', value: 'hi@retrace.io,foo@gmail.com', offsetStart: 0, offsetEnd: 32 },
     { keyword: 'to', value: 'me', offsetStart: 33, offsetEnd: 38 },
     { keyword: 'subject', value: 'vacations', offsetStart: 39, offsetEnd: 56 },
     { keyword: 'date', value: '1/10/2013-15/04/2014', offsetStart: 57, offsetEnd: 82 },
     { text: 'photos', offsetStart: 83, offsetEnd: 89 } ]
}
```

## Installation

```shell
$ npm install search-query-parser
```

## Usage

```javascript
var searchQuery = require('search-query-parser');

var query = 'from:hi@retrace.io,foo@gmail.com to:me subject:vacations date:1/10/2013-15/04/2014 photos';
var options = {keywords: ['from', 'to', 'subject'], ranges: ['date']}

var searchQueryObj = searchQuery.parse(query, options);

// searchQueryObj.from is now ['hi@retrace.io', 'foo@gmail.com']
// searchQueryObj.to is now 'me'
// searchQueryObj.date is now {from: '1/10/2013', to: '15/04/2014'}
// searchQueryObj.text is now 'photos'
```

You can configure what keywords and ranges the parser should accept with the options argument.
It accepts 5 values:
* `keywords`, that can be separated by commas (,). Accepts an array of strings.
* `ranges`, that can be separated by a hyphen (-). Accepts an array of strings.
* `tokenize`, that controls the behaviour of text search terms. If set to `true`, non-keyword text terms are returned as an array of strings where each term in the array is a whitespace-separated word, or a multi-word term surrounded by single- or double-quotes.
* `alwaysArray`, a boolean that controls the behaviour of the returned query. If set to `true`, all matched keywords would always be arrays instead of strings. If set to `false` they will be strings if matched a single value. Defaults to `false`.
* `offsets`, a boolean that controls the behaviour of the returned query. If set to `true`, the query will contain the offsets object. If set to `false`, the query will not contain the offsets object. Defaults to `true`.

If no keywords or ranges are specified, or if none are present in the given search query, then `searchQuery.parse` will return a string if `tokenize` is false, or an array of strings under the key `text` if `tokenize` is true.

```javascript
var searchQuery = require('search-query-parser');

var query = 'a query with "just text"';
var parsedQuery = searchQuery.parse(query);
// parsedQuery is now 'a query with "just text"'

var options = {keywords: ['unused']};
var parsedQueryWithOptions = searchQuery.parse(query, options);
// parsedQueryWithOptions is now 'a query with "just text"'

var options2 = {tokenize: true};
var parsedQueryWithTokens = searchQuery.parse(query, options2);
// parsedQueryWithTokens is now: ['a', 'query', 'with', 'just text']
```

You can also use exclusion syntax, like `-from:sep@foobar.io name:hello,world`. This also works with non-keyword text terms when `tokenize` is set to `true`. 

```javascript
{
  name: ['hello', 'world'],
  exclude: {
    from: ['sep@foobar.io']
  }
}
```

Sometimes checking against whether a keyword holds string or not can be excessive and prone to errors; it's often easier to simply expect everything is an array even if it means doing 1-iteration loops often.

```javascript
var searchQuery = require('search-query-parser');

var query = 'test:helloworld fun:yay,happy';
var options = {keywords: ['test', 'fun']};
var parsedQueryWithOptions = searchQuery.parse(query, options);
// parsedQueryWithOptions is now:
// {
//   test: 'helloworld',
//   fun: ['yay', 'happy']
// }

var optionsAlwaysArray = {keywords: ['test', 'fun'], alwaysArray: true};
var parsedQueryWithOptions = searchQuery.parse(query, options);
// parsedQueryWithOptions is now:
// {
//   test: ['helloworld'], //No need to check whether test is a string or not!
//   fun: ['yay', 'happy']
// }
```

The offsets object could become pretty huge with long search queries which could be an unnecessary use of space if no functionality depends on it. It can simply be turned off using the option `offsets: false`

## Typescript

Typescript types are available for this library.

## Testing

The 29 tests are written using the BDD testing framework should.js, and run with mocha.

Run `npm install should` and `npm install -g mocha` to install them both.

Run tests with `make test`.

## License

The MIT License (MIT)

Copyright (c) 2014 retraceio

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
